[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK.
So today we're going to
talk about the large sieve.
So last week, we
introduced the large sieve.
And we explained how it's
analogous to the projections
theorems that we proved
in finite fields,
and the projection theorems that
we proved in Euclidean space.
And today, I wanted
to explain to you
some of the applications of the
large sieve in number theory.
So the original application of
the large sieve was by Linnik.
And he was interested in
how quadratic residues are
distributed.
And I wrote that one
up on the homework.
So the homework problem is
to retrace Linnik's steps
proving about how quadratic
residues are distributed.
And then a second important
influential application
has to do with how prime numbers
are distributed modulo q.
So that's what I'm going to
tell you all about today.
So first, we'll do
some background.
First, we'll talk
about what is known
about how prime numbers
are distributed modulo q.
All right.
So let's say pi of N is the
number of primes up to N.
And then, we can look at the
modulo q for some choice q
and see how many of those
primes are in each moduli class.
So pi N, q, a is the number
of p prime, p less than
or equal to N. And
p equals a mod q.
Now some of these moduli classes
will be quite-- some of these
will be quite small.
If a and q have a common
factor, then there
will be only finitely many
primes in this moduli class.
So the main focus is on the ones
where the GCD of a and q is 1.
So focus on the case.
So I'm going to write
it that a is in Zq star.
Zq star is the set of
a and Z mod q, where
a is relatively prime to q.
So numerically
and theoretically,
it looks like the
primes are pretty evenly
distributed among all of
these residue classes.
And it is relevant to
say how many there are,
so that's called phi of q.
It's the cardinality of Zq star,
the number of different a that
are relatively prime to q.
So if the primes were really
well evenly distributed
among the moduli classes,
then you would expect--
so I'll write this way.
So we see even
distribution, and that
means that the actual number
of primes in the moduli class
is close to the total
number of primes
divided by the number
of moduli classes.
So how would we
measure this precisely?
We define delta q of N, the
defect of equidistribution,
to be the maximum
over all the residue
classes of the difference
between the actual number
of primes and this
naive estimate.
So when we ask, how
evenly are primes
distributed modulo q,
quantitatively, that means,
how big is this thing?
So this question
was first addressed
by Dirichlet, who showed
that, in a certain sense,
that this is close to this.
Here's what he proved.
He proved that for any q, if
you take the limit as N goes
to infinity of
delta q of N, it's
asymptotically smaller than N/q.
So this limit is 0.
So actually, let
me say, when you're
talking about these
being equidistributed,
we're going to mean
that this is small.
Small relative to what?
Well, this is a good
approximation of this
if this error term is small
compared to the main term.
So equidistribution would
mean that delta q of N
is much smaller than
the main term, which
is on the order of N/q, or
it could be N over log N q.
So Dirichlet's arguments, you
can make them quantitative.
Instead of having
a limit, you could
say, if N is sufficiently big.
And they were made quantitative
by Siegel and Walfisz, which
involves some additional ideas.
And so this line of thinking
led to the following theorem.
So for any q, delta q
of N is bounded by--
OK, so let me say it this way.
So for any A, there's a constant
C sub A. And delta q of N
is bounded by C sub A, N,
log of N to the minus A.
Now when is this useful?
When does this tell
us that delta q of N
is much smaller than N/q?
Well, q cannot be too big.
So delta q N is much
smaller than N/q
if q is smaller than
a power of log N.
I'm not going to
talk about the proofs
of these theorems in the class.
So Dirichlet
invented L-functions,
you may have heard of
Dirichlet L-functions,
in order to prove this theorem.
And all of this work is
based on L-functions.
So those are nice
theorems, but they only
work when q is pretty
small compared to N.
What happens if q is bigger?
Well, experimentally what seems
to happen is the following.
So this is conjectured
by Montgomery.
So for every epsilon
bigger than 0, delta q of N
is bounded by C epsilon
N to the epsilon.
It's like a fudge factor.
And then, there's
N/q to the 1/2.
So this is a
pseudorandom behavior.
So a good reference point,
sometimes people ask,
are primes distributed?
Does it look random the
way primes are distributed?
So a good reference
point is there
are about N over log N
primes up to N. So instead,
pick N over log
N random numbers.
Reduce the mod q and
see what happens.
So this is what you would see
if you had random numbers.
So this is a
pseudorandom conjecture.
So this is much stronger
than we could prove.
And it implies, incidentally,
that delta q of N
is much smaller than N/q,
so we have some pretty good
equidistribution, as long
as q is smaller than N
to the 1 minus epsilon.
So there is a huge gap
between this and this.
So this result, I think,
was proven in the 1930s.
And it is still, today, the
best result of its kind.
So we cannot increase this
to say N to the epsilon.
If we are willing to assume
the Riemann hypothesis,
or this would be the
generalized Riemann hypothesis,
then we get much
stronger information,
although still not
this conjecture.
So it says, for every
epsilon bigger than 0,
delta q of N is bounded by
C epsilon, N to the epsilon,
times N to the 1/2.
Looks like this, but with
no q in the denominator.
And that's good enough to
imply that we get some amount
of equidistribution if q is
smaller than N to the 1/2 minus
epsilon.
So it gives some idea of how
difficult this conjecture is
that, even with the
Riemann hypothesis,
we're only halfway there.
So this is everything
that is known
if you want to have a
theorem that definitely
works for a particular q.
And having run into
a barrier there
that has been difficult to
overcome, people started
to think about, well,
maybe we won't prove
a theorem for every single q.
But we could prove a
theorem for most of them.
So that's the main
topic of the class
today, so theorems for most q.
So this theorem, again,
I want to credit Rényi
and Bombieri-Vinogradov.
I read about the
history yesterday.
So this is usually called the
Bombieri-Vinogradov theorem.
The first person to prove
a theorem of this flavor
seems to be Rényi.
And then, various people
improved the parameters
in the theorem, building up
to Bombieri and Vinogradov.
So it says the following thing
for every epsilon bigger than 0.
So if I take the sum, epsilon q,
up to N to the 1/2 minus epsilon
of delta q of N, check
the exact phrasing.
A, then, this is
bounded by constant
depending on epsilon and A,
and log of N to the minus A.
So let's digest
this a little bit.
So the job of epsilon is
that we can almost go up to N
to the 1/2, but not quite.
And then, the job of A is that--
so this tells us that
for most, not all,
but most of the q up to N
to the 1/2 minus epsilon,
delta q of N is
bounded by, well,
I divide both sides by
the number of terms.
And so I could put here,
N/q log of N to the minus
A, so which is indeed
much smaller than N/q.
So informally, for most q,
we get good equidistribution
of the primes modulo q.
And it so happens that the size
of the q's we can get up to here
matches the size of the q's
you can get up to if you
knew the Riemann hypothesis.
And so this is sometimes
summarized as being,
it's definitely not as good
as the Riemann hypothesis,
but it's for most version
of what you would learn
from the Riemann hypothesis.
So my goal today is
to tell you the ideas
of the proof of this theorem.
There are certain things
that are a bit messy.
And I won't do all
of the messy things,
so we won't do a complete proof.
But I'd like to address
a couple of questions,
like, what does this have to
do with sieves and projection
theory?
And another question, what
does it have to do with primes,
or how will we use
it there, in primes?
Since we're only trying to
prove things for most q,
we're looking at all
of the different q's.
So we have one set of primes
and we're projecting it modulo q
for lots of different q's.
So that's the setting
of projection theory
where we can bring in
things like the large sieve.
So I wanted to recall,
so the large sieve
allows us to prove the
following kind of thing.
So we have a set x contained
in the integers up to N.
And I look at pi p of 1 x.
And I'll take the
high part of that.
And then this thing is
small for most p in Pm.
So this Pm, maybe I'll put it--
so Pm is the set of
p prime, p around m.
So this looks, on the
surface, like a similar thing.
We have a set x.
We project it modulo p for
many different primes p.
And we throw out
the constant part
and just look at the
variation from being constant.
And this is saying that this
projection is pretty evenly
distributed for
most of the primes.
So it sounds similar to this.
And indeed, this will
be crucially relevant.
Now this is a statement
about every set x.
In particular, you could
put the primes here
so you get a theorem
about primes,
but it's true for every set.
This theorem is definitely
not true for every set.
So I'll make a remark that
the theorem is not true
if you replace the
primes by just some set
x of numbers up to
N, with maybe roughly
the same size as the primes.
So there's a simple example, but
I think it's instructive to see.
So the examples
like this, I'm going
to try to build
a set where I can
reduce it modulo every prime.
And whichever prime
I reduce it by,
I will see one
moduli class which
is extremely overrepresented.
So here's how we
build such a set.
So for every p in primes
of size around m, m
is just a free parameter here,
I choose some a and Z mod p.
And then, I'll make my
set x is going to be
the union over all the primes.
And then, I take
the set of N up to N
so that N is equal to a mod p.
So for each prime I
pick a moduli class.
I take all the integers
in that moduli class,
and I take a union over all
the primes in my set of primes.
So if I were to
take pi p1x of a,
well, x contains
all the integers
in this moduli class up
to N. So this is basically
N/p, which is around N/m.
And that's much
bigger than average.
The average would be
the size of-- yes.
So actually, let's
figure out the size of x.
So the size of x is, at most,
there will be about N/m numbers
in this moduli class.
And then, there are about
M over log m primes,
so something like this.
So that is a smallish fraction.
It's much less than all of them.
So this is way smaller
than the size of x over p.
So this guy is seriously
overrepresented,
and it happens for every p.
OK, great.
So this theorem is, we
will see, the large sieve
is absolutely crucial
thing in the proof.
It's the main idea.
But this is not a theorem
about arbitrary sets.
It's a theorem
about prime numbers,
and so the proof needs to use
something about prime numbers.
So the main character
is a concept called
multiplicative convolution.
And I think this is a nice
concept to know about.
It's a cousin of regular
additive convolution.
We'll see that it interacts with
all the things in our story.
So multiplicative
convolution interacts really
nicely with prime
numbers, describing
what our prime numbers,
it comes up naturally.
And it also interacts nicely
with taking projections.
And so it interacts nicely
with the large sieve,
and fitting all those things
together is how we prove this.
So what is multiplicative
convolution?
So suppose f and g are functions
on the natural numbers.
If I take the multiplicative
convolution of them,
it means I add up over
all the pairs n1 and n2
whose product is n.
And then, I take
f of n1, g of n2.
So let's compare that
with regular convolution.
So regular convolution,
say, on the integers,
would be the same thing.
But I would have the sum
over all the pairs n1 n2 who
add up to n.
And the multiplicative version
is, we replace the sum here
by a product.
So that's multiplicative
convolution.
So we have to see how
multiplicative convolution
connects with primes.
And we have to see how
multiplicative convolution
interacts with projections.
We'll put that together and
that's how we prove the theorem.
So let's start with primes.
So the large sieve inequality,
we use this word, sieve.
And I will explain
to you now, where
does the word sieve come from?
And it comes out naturally
when you think about primes.
So how do you find
the prime numbers?
Suppose I wanted to make a
list of prime numbers up to n.
What would I do?
I would start with all
the natural numbers.
Then, I cross off
the multiples of two.
Then, I cross off the
multiples of 3, and so on.
And then, what's left
are the prime numbers.
So that process
is called sieving.
I think sieving
physically is where
you take a thing full of
sand that somewhere in there
has a little gold, or
diamond, or something.
And you shake this
thing and the sand
falls out, until
eventually you're
just left with the diamonds.
So the image is you have a
thing full of sand, which
are all the natural numbers.
And you shake it, and you
take out the multiples of 2,
and the multiples
of 3, or whatever.
And then, eventually you just
have the prime numbers left.
That's the image.
To find the primes, we start
with the natural numbers.
Then, we cross out
multiples of 2.
Then, we cross out multiples
of 3, and dot, dot, dot.
So we can all imagine that.
Now, let's try to describe
this process using formulas.
And we'll see that the
formulas that naturally appear
are formulas involving
multiplicative convolution.
So I'm going to write 1 of n to
be the characteristic function
of all the natural numbers.
And then, the next
character I'm going to put
is a function called
difference sub p of n.
So it's 1 if n equals 1, and
it's negative 1 if n is p,
and it's 0 otherwise.
Now let's think
what would happen
if I took all the
natural numbers
and I did a multiplicative
convolution with D2.
So this would give me, so D2 has
a positive delta function at 1
and a negative
delta function at 2.
So when I do this I'm going
to get characteristic function
of all the natural numbers
coming from this 1,
minus the characteristic
function of 2 times
the natural numbers
coming from that 1.
Let me pause there.
Does that make sense?
Does that fit with the
plugging in the definition
of multiplicative convolution?
Let's do it slowly to be sure.
So what's the definition?
1 convolved with
D2 of n is the sum.
n1, n2 equals n of 1
of n1 times D2 of n2.
Now D2 is only
non-vanishing in two cases.
So we actually only have
to consider that n2 is 1
or n2 is 2.
So the 1 is always there.
So that is 1 of n times D2 of 1.
And then, if D is even, so this
is what happens if n is odd.
And then, if n is even,
then n2 could be 2.
So we would get 1
of n, 1 of n over 2.
Sorry, we get the--
so this is both cases.
1 of n, D2 of 1, minus 1 of
plus 1 of n over 2, D2 of 2.
So this is just 1.
And this is 1 minus
1, which is 0.
So we're left with the
characteristic function
of the odd numbers.
Let's go one further.
If I take the characteristic
function of the naturals,
I do a multiplicative
convolution with D2.
Then, I do a multiplicative
convolution with D3.
What happens?
Well, this 1 gives me the
characteristic function
of the odd numbers.
And then I'm convolving with D3.
Now what happens?
I get the
characteristic function
of the odd numbers minus
the characteristic function
of 3 times the odd numbers.
Then, I do this.
So I have the odd
numbers, but now I'm
going to cross out the ones
that are multiples of 3.
And so this is the
characteristic function of,
n is relatively
prime to 2 and 3.
So this shows by example
that this process, starting
with the natural numbers,
crossing out multiples of 2,
crossing out multiples of 3,
it corresponds to convolving
by these D's over and over.
So now let me make
a little notation.
So we're going to do sieve
for primes, general version.
So suppose that S
is a set of primes.
And then, RP sub s
of n, that stands
for relatively prime to s.
This is 1 if p and n are
relatively prime for all
the primes in my set.
So it's 1 if my number n is
relatively prime to everybody
in s, and 0 otherwise.
So it's 0 if there exists a
prime in my set that divides it.
So let's make our remark.
So if S is the primes that go
up to the square root of N,
and little n is,
let's say, bigger
than the square root
of N, but at most
N, then either n has a
prime factor from this list
or it is prime.
So in that case, our relatively
prime s of n is just P of n
whether n is prime.
So this thing, if I'm
interested in the primes
in a certain range,
say, from n over 2 to n,
I can detect them
using this function.
And this function we've just
seen is a big convolution.
So lemma, so if my set
of primes is p1 up to pr,
then relatively prime
sub s of n is 1 convolved
with Dp1, convolved with Dpr.
These are all
multiplicative convolutions.
AUDIENCE: Can I ask you,
for the examples there,
I wondered why you have
p of 1x of a is over p,
like why it really becomes
contributions from other teams?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah, OK.
So the question is coming
back to this example.
We built a set whose
projection onto every prime
has one place that's really big.
And x is made as a union
of arithmetic progressions.
Now this x is a set.
It's not a function.
So these arithmetic
progressions might overlap.
But if they do, the point where
they overlap in this formulation
only counts once, although
it's not super important.
So if you look at pi p of 1x of
a, that's how many elements of x
are congruent to a mod p.
And so all of them are already.
And some of the
other p might also
contain some of these elements,
but it doesn't count anymore.
AUDIENCE: Oh, OK.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Although
if it did count anymore,
it would just make this
phenomenon even more extreme
than it already is.
OK, cool.
Any other questions or comments?
So the characteristic
function of the primes
is a special function,
probably in lots of ways.
And the way that's
relevant for us today
is that the characteristic
function of the primes
is basically this
function, which
is a big convolution, a big
multiplicative convolution.
And so the
Bombieri-Vinogradov theorem
is mostly a theorem
about functions
that have the structure
that they're convolutions.
So that is how
multiplicative convolution
is related to primes.
Next, let's think about how
multiplicative convolution
is related to projections.
So here there are a bunch of
different fairly simple lemmas.
And all these lemmas
have the flavor
that doing multiplicative
convolution
and doing projections
fits together
as well as you could hope.
And I think, basically,
the reason for that
is that the projection
operation is
a ring homomorphism from the
ring Z to the ring Z mod q.
And we'll be talking
about multiplication.
So being a ring homomorphism,
it means that the projection
respects the product operation.
And so the multiplicative
convolution
is defined in terms of
the product operation,
so it all fits together.
So lemma 1 says that, if
f and g natural numbers
go to C, then if I take the
projection of f convolved
with g, I get the
with the projection of g.
This one requires
the definition.
If I had been
savvy in general, I
might have defined
multiplicative convolution
in the first place for
any multiplicative monoid
or something.
But anyway, let's just say
what it is for z mod q.
It is what we think.
If I have maybe capital F and
capital G functions on Z mod q,
then multiplicative
convolution of a class a
is the sum over all
pairs a1 a2 that
multiply to a of capital
F of a1, capital G of a2.
So this is the first lemma.
And the proof idea is you
just start on either side
and write down the definition
and unwind everything.
And you use the fact
that that reduction mod
q is a ring homomorphism
and it all fits together.
So I think that my
saying that is clearer
than if I were to write it out.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Do you not get the
issues from double counting them
at the left side
because you have
to make the kernel over them?
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK.
So this is a homomorphism
but with a kernel.
Let's write it out and make
sure that this actually is OK.
I'm going to put the
proofs on this board
so that eventually we'll
just have this list of lemmas
that will be handy.
So here's how I like to
think about the proof.
I'm going to think of f as a
sum over n1 of a delta function
at n1 weighted by f of n1.
And I can do the same with g.
Sum over n2 delta
function of n2, g of n2.
What happens when I
take their convolution?
The multiplicative convolution
is the sum over n1 and n2.
I have a delta function at n1,
n2 weighted by f of n1, g of n2.
Let's check that this is the
same definition as before.
So if I want to evaluate
this at a point n, well,
when I evaluate
this at n it only
appears if n1 times n2 is n.
So I'm summing over pairs n1
times n2 that multiply to n.
And I'm summing up
f of n1, g of n2.
Does this look OK to people?
Maybe let me add, when
I write delta n1, that's
a function of n.
And it means it's 1
if n is equal to n1,
and it's 0 otherwise.
So this delta is
a delta function.
So f is this, and g is
this, and f star g is this.
So now, what is pi qf of a?
It's the sum over n1 of a
delta function at n1 mod
q of a, f of n1.
So I like the image of f and
g as some kind of density.
So we think of f as a
description of some stuff.
And there's f of n1 stuff
located at n1, and same for g.
So what does the projection do?
It just takes the stuff at n1
and it moves it to n1 modulo q.
And stuff is coming to n1 modulo
q from several different places
and it just adds up.
And what does convolution do?
It takes every bit of stuff here
and every bit of stuff here.
It takes a bit that's at n1
here and a bit that's n2 there.
Takes those two bits and it
makes a new bit at n1 times n2.
And the weight of the
new bit is the product.
And there may be several new
bits arriving at the same place,
then we add them up.
So that's what the
projection does.
So now, if I take the
projection of f convolved
with the projection of g at a,
it's the sum over n1 and n2,
the delta function n1 times n2
mod q of a, f of n, 1, g of n2.
So then that's the same as
pi q of f convolved with g.
So all it boils down
to is, I have this bit
of f and this bit of g.
And I could first
reduce them each mod q
and then multiply them together,
or I could first multiply them
together and then reduce mod q.
And those are the
same as each other
because reduction mod
q is a homomorphism.
So that's the first lemma.
Second lemma says,
so eventually, we
would like some
L-infinity bounds.
But so far in projection theory,
we've mostly seen L2 bounds.
And they're related to
each other by basically
Cauchy-Schwarz.
So it says that if
I have f and g on Z,
q, then a multiplicative
convolution of them,
if I take the L-infinity
norm on Zq star,
that is bounded by f L2, g L2.
So in lemma 2, I think it's
important to put this star here,
multiplication.
So we leave out 0 and we leave
out things with a common factor
with q.
If you included
0, there are a lot
of ways to have a
product that makes 0,
and I felt a little worried
about how that would go.
So that's why we
have this star here.
Let's prove lemma 2.
Proof of lemma 2.
So if a is in Zq star,
then f convolved g of a
is going to be the sum b in Zq
star, f of b, g of ab inverse.
Why?
Well, we're adding up over
pairs that multiply to a.
And since a is in Zq
star, a is invertible.
Each of these has
to be invertible.
So b had better also be in
Zq star, and so we get this.
And then, we use Cauchy-Schwarz,
and we bound that by f L2, g L2.
There is a small technical
issue about Zq or Zq star.
So we're going to
break something up
into a constant part and the
other part, constant part
and the high frequency part.
And it's slightly
different whether you
do this on Zq or Zq star.
It's just a minor
technical nuisance.
q is even usually
going to be prime,
so I'm just going
to be leaving out 0.
But let me just
write a lemma that
says that this isn't
such a big deal.
So a little notation.
So suppose I have
a function f on Zq.
I might be interested
in f just on Zq star.
So I'm going to
call that f star.
It's just the restriction
of f to Zq star.
Now I could split
either one of these
up into a constant
part plus a leftover,
but the constants would
be slightly different.
So f is f0 plus f high,
and f star is f0 star
plus f high star.
So f0 and f0 star are constant.
And the other
pieces have mean 0,
but in slightly different sense.
So if I add up fh of a
over Z mod q, I'd get 0.
But if I add up f star
h over Zq star, I get--
OK.
So I felt like I had to say
this to be honest at some point,
but it's not really a big deal.
And lemma 3 says that the L2
norm of the high star part
is at most the L2 norm
of the regular high part.
So this one lives on Zq star,
and this one lives on Zq.
And then, the last lemma says
that the high part commutes well
with multiplicative convolution.
So if f star and g star
are on Zq star, then--
there's going to be a lot
of stars in this formula--
the high part of the
convolution is the convolution
of the high parts.
We could prove all these
things if we feel like it.
They're not difficult.
I think I want
to leave it for
now, because I've
put an excessive number
of details on the board,
and try to step back, and
have a bigger picture,
and then pause and check in.
So all of these lemmas imply
the following proposition.
So maybe I have
some convolution,
some multiplicative
convolution, f star g.
And I would like to reduce
it mod q for different q's.
So I look at it projected mod q.
And then, I'm only going to be
interested in the star part.
I'm going to restrict
it to Zq star.
And I want to know whether
that's almost constant,
so I'll look at the
high part of that.
And I want to know that
that's small everywhere.
This is the kind of estimate
that we are asking about
in the Bombieri-Vinogradov
theorem
because our set of primes
is morally a multiplicative
convolution.
And I'm taking the set of
primes and reducing it mod q,
and looking at the different
classes that I have in Zq star.
And I think that
that's going to be
almost constant, so I'm going to
subtract off the constant part.
And now I want to
know that what's left
is very small everywhere, so
that's an L infinity norm.
So the Bombieri-Vinogradov
theorem
is about estimating
this kind of thing.
And the proposition says
that that is smaller
than pi q of f high L2,
pi q of g high and L2.
And it's just assembling
a bunch of those lemmas.
So the projection of the
convolution high part is the--
so proof of proposition.
We have the projection
of the convolution.
Restrict it.
Take the high part.
This is the
projection, star high
convolved with the
projection of g star high.
So that's lemma 4, high parts.
No, sorry.
This is pi q of f convolved
with pi q of g, restricted
to star high.
So that's lemma 1.
Convolution plays
well with projections.
And then, lemma 4
says that that's that.
And so now the
L-infinity norm is
bounded by pi q of f star high
L2, pi q of g star high L2.
That's lemma 3.
Sorry, that's lemma 2.
And then, that's bounded by just
pi q of f high L2, pi q of g L2,
and that's lemma.
So let me summarize a little
bit and then pause to check in.
So an issue that
we're dealing with
is L2 norms versus
L-infinity norms.
Because we're trying
to prove something
that's true for
every moduli class,
so it's an L-infinity norm.
But our techniques that
come from Fourier analysis,
and so on, it usually
tells us about L2 norms.
So if you have a
bound like this,
it tells you that pi q of f
is pretty evenly distributed,
at most a.
And we're trying
to prove a bound
like this that says that
the projection of this thing
is pretty evenly
distributed at every a.
And the point of
this proposition,
it says that if pi
q of f and pi q of g
are pretty evenly
distributed, just at most a,
then the projection
of their convolution
is pretty evenly
distributed at every a.
And so that's why being
a convolution is helpful.
So a little pause for
questions and comments.
OK, cool.
So now let's go on.
And these two things are
controlled by the large sieve.
The large sieve tells us
that if f is some function,
then this L2 norm
is small for most q.
And so we're going to
write down that bound
and see how small it is.
And then, we're going to plug
it into this proposition.
We'll get a bound for this.
So large sieve.
So remember that Pm is the
set of p prime, p around m.
And so we proved in
class, and so we'll always
have a function which is
defined on the integers up to N,
and it goes to C. And we
proved in class that if you
take the sum p and Pm of--
so in class, we
thought about what
happens if M is smaller than
the square root of N. Then,
we got the sum pi q
of f high L2 squared.
And that is bounded by N/M
times just f L2 squared.
M could be bigger than N to
1/2, and that will be relevant,
and this story is
often relevant.
And the proof idea is
the same, but then it
works out a little
bit differently.
So if M is bigger than N to 1/2,
then this same sum is bounded
by M times f L2 squared.
So this one was in class, and
this one is on the homework.
So I posted the
homework for next week,
and the first
problem is to do this
mostly as a way of
thinking through how
the large sieve worked.
And then the second bit
is about Linnik's thing
about quadratic residues.
So now we are going to plug
these things into here.
So we get, all together,
I'll call it a theorem.
Let's say like this.
So suppose f is a
function on N1 up to C,
and g is a function
on numbers up to N2.
And so if I take their
multiplicative convolution,
that will be a function
on the integers up to N,
where N is N1 times N2.
And then, I can take the sum p
and Pm of f convolved with g.
I project it mod q.
I maybe take the high,
take the star part.
That doesn't matter if you do it
or not, but in our application
we'll do it, and then
subtract off the constant.
So the idea is that
this thing should
be pretty close to
constant much of the time.
So we look at the
non-constant part.
And then, that is
bounded by, there's
an expression that's
slightly messy.
And then, we have f L2 and g L2.
And the thing that goes in
here when you work it out is--
I'll have to check.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: When you're
defining the convolution of f
and g is a function that
can be integers up to N,
how is that defined for
the product pair 1 times
N for N large?
Because f and g are individually
only defined up to N1 and N2,
right?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yes.
That's right.
So you should imagine f and g
being extended as 0 beyond that.
So the question
was how to define
in the definition of this.
We'll have all the pairs,
little n1 times little n2,
that multiply to n.
And it could happen that
little n1 or little n2 are
too big to lie in this region.
And then we just set f to be 0.
Oh, and sorry.
And this is L infinity.
It's not L2.
So one thing that
I find a little
difficult about the proof,
or teaching the proof,
is that the formulas are
a little bit complicated.
But the idea of this is to
just combine the large sieve
and this proposition.
So if you start with the
left-hand side and you just
apply this proposition,
then we get--
yeah, I guess we
don't need that.
We get a sum, p and Pm of pi
q of f high L2, pi q of g high
and L2.
So the proposition just said
that this L-infinity norm
is bounded by this product.
I copied down the sum.
And then this looks a lot like
the input of the large sieve.
So if I Cauchy-Schwarz it, I
get the sum pi q of f high L2
squared to the 1/2, and then the
sum pi q of g high L2 squared
to the 1/2.
And then I apply
the large sieve.
So the large sieve gives a
bound for each of these things
and I plug it in.
And what makes it
a little bit messy
is that, because there are
two cases, the bound for this
is a sum of two terms,
and the bound for this
is a sum of two terms.
So then, when I
multiply that together,
I get this sum of two terms
times that sum of two terms.
In the setting of our
main theorem about primes,
the theorem of
Rényi, and Bombieri,
and Vinogradov, the size
of f and the size of g
would be around 1
where they're defined.
And so the L2 norms of f and
g would be around N1 and N2,
and squared would be around N2.
So if you plug that
all in, then we'd
get our sum L infinity
would be bounded by N/m,
plus the square root of N1, N,
plus the square root of N2, N,
plus M root N.
And then, our goal would be that
this sum is much smaller than N.
So it's good as long as M
is less than N to 1/2 minus
epsilon.
That's where that condition
comes from, the range of q,
and as long as N1 and N2
are much smaller than N.
So in this part, I redid
the computation at home
and it's a little bit messy.
I did spend some
time trying to think
if there's a way of saying
it without computing
to see when it works well and
when it doesn't work well.
I have a couple
comments about that,
although I don't
feel like I know how
to see everything that way yet.
So one comment is
that it doesn't
work very well if N1
or N2 is almost N.
And there's a conceptual
reason for that.
So suppose N2 was N.
That means N1 would be 1.
So my f is supported
just on 1, and my g
is supported all
the way up to N.
And when I convolve
them together,
I just get g times
the value of f at 1.
So in that situation
there's no special structure
of this function.
It's a totally
arbitrary function.
And since this kind
of theorem is not
true for arbitrary
functions, it can't
work when N1 and N2
are really close to N.
So as long as N1 and
N2 are kind of even,
there's a meaningful
convolution going on.
As long as neither of them is
close to 1, neither of them
is close to N, there's a
meaningful convolution structure
going on.
And in that setting,
these terms are OK.
This term here is OK
as long as M is big.
M is reasonably big.
We need M to be reasonably big
so that we're actually looking
at many different projections.
Because we're just
looking at one projection,
we can never say
anything about it
by just using projection theory
And here, we need M
to be not too much
bigger than the square root of
N. And the reason for that is,
so one important case here
is when N1 and N2 are equal.
So they would both be
the square root of N.
And if M is bigger than
the square root of N,
M would be bigger
than both N1 and N2.
And when that happens, the
theorem might still be true,
but the proof doesn't
work very well.
You see, if M is
bigger than N1 and N2,
I have this function f that's
defined on the numbers up to N1.
And then, I tried projecting
it mod q, where q is around M.
So q is actually bigger than N1.
So this projection operation
is extremely uninteresting.
The first N1 elements I copied
down, and the rest I put 0.
So since that projection
operation is trivial,
no theorem from
projection theory
is going to say
anything useful here.
The gain that we're getting
is that as long as--
so I need either N1 or N2
to be bigger than M in order
to get off the ground.
Once N1 or N2 is bigger than M,
let's say N2 is bigger than M,
then, when I look at these
projections, most of them
are almost constant.
That's where the
mileage is coming from.
So these guys are
almost constant.
These guys might or might
not be almost constant.
It's OK either way.
And then, when I
convolve it together,
the convolution is
almost constant.
And in a strong
sense, it's everywhere
almost constant, instead of just
most places almost constant.
Actually, another
visual thing is,
so say this guy is almost
constant but not everywhere.
So in most places it's almost
constant, but a couple of places
it has a big bump.
When I take this convolution,
then to evaluate the convolution
at any given point, I have to
look at the contribution of this
at every point.
And so those couple of places
only contribute a little.
And mostly I see the
contribution of the places
where this is small.
So that's what's going on.
And then you do have
to do some algebra
to see just how much
we learned from that.
So now let's go
back to our theorem.
And this last part I'm not
going to do every detail, which
even gets a little bit messier.
But I'll just say the
skeleton and then we'll pause.
So let's say that S is
the primes up to N to 1/2.
And then, remember that if,
say, N over 2 is less than p,
is less than N, or actually,
just N to 1/2 is less than N,
then R relatively prime
to S of n is prime.
So we can basically
study this function
by studying that function.
And then, we also know that
relatively prime S of N
is 1 convolved with
Dp1, convolved with Dpr.
And these are all
multiplicative convolutions.
This whole thing is a ton of
But if I just want
to see two of them,
then I could say it's this
guy convolved with that guy.
Now this function, as
written, it goes on forever,
and this function
goes on forever.
But I only want to
evaluate this up
to capital N. So this guy
at N1 and this guy at N2,
after they come together
in the convolution,
they'll only be relevant
if N1 times N2 is less
than capital N.
So what I'll do is
I'll write this as
a sum on I1 of f
times the characteristic
function of I1.
So I'll just divide up the
numbers into some intervals.
And I'm going to convolve
that with the sum over I2 of g
characteristic function of I2.
And I can open up
the parentheses.
It's the sum, I1 and I2, of f
I1, f I1 convolved with g I2.
And now if I only want to
capture this up to capital N,
so let me say that N1
is the maximum of I1,
and N2 is the maximum of I2.
So for little n less than or
equal to capital N, R Ps of n
will be the sum over I1, I2 of
f characteristic function of I1
convolved with g
characteristic function of I2.
And here, I can assume that N1
times N2 is less than around N.
Maybe I should make
this the minimum.
Yeah, because otherwise the
product of these two intervals
will be bigger than
capital N, so it
won't have any influence here.
So then for each of these we
apply the theorem, theorem A,
that theorem there.
And it tells me that when I
reduce these things, mod q,
for most q's, the non-constant
part is small in L infinity.
So this works for
most of the terms.
It works as long as N1 and
N2 are much bigger than 1,
and much less than N,
but it could happen.
A piece of this would be this
guy with I2 very close to 1,
or even just the 0.1,
convolved with that guy.
That's in there, too.
How do you deal with that?
Well, this function f
is itself a convolution.
So then I can take f and I
split it up, and I keep going.
So if N1 is almost N,
and N2 is almost 1,
use f is f1 convolved
with f2, dot, dot, dot.
So this part gets
a little bit messy.
And to be honest,
I'm not positive
whether this exact thing works.
This is a possible project.
So what I read in analytic
number theory books
is a slightly
fancier way of taking
this function, characteristic
function of prime numbers,
and writing it in terms of some
multiplicative convolutions.
And for the slightly
fancier way,
there end up being
less terms here,
and it works out more cleanly.
But it also, at least I had
a little bit more trouble
motivating it and seeing
how people thought of it.
Anyway, so I'm not positive.
I think that this may work in
all details, or maybe not quite.
Maybe it requires
more fidgeting.
But nevertheless,
I think it shows
the main ideas that
go into proving
the Bombieri-Vinogradov theorem.
AUDIENCE: Sorry, I'm
still really confused.
So what are those
intervals, I1 and I2?
LAWRENCE GUTH: What are
the intervals I1 and I2?
So you might first
try dyadic intervals.
And so modulo technical
details, that's good.
But actually, there's
a little problem
with taking dyadic intervals
that wherever you stop,
this function will be exactly
the function that we want up
to capital N. And then it'll go
a little bit beyond capital N.
And there'll be
some stuff that's
not exactly this function
anymore, and then it'll die off.
And we'd like to prove that
you just take this function
and sharply cut
it off at capital
N. We'd like that to
be evenly distributed.
But we have this
extra junk at the end.
OK, so that's a problem.
And the solution
to that problem is
we can greatly reduce
the amount of junk
by replacing dyadic
intervals by intervals
that are somewhat narrower.
If we make I1 and I2 narrow,
then whenever I1 times I2
crosses over N, it will only
cross over a little bit,
so we'll have only a
little bit of junk.
So that's who I1 and I2 are.
AUDIENCE: OK.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Can you recap what
properties of R Ps we used?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
The question was, can we recap
what properties of R Ps we used?
So the first property is
that R Ps detects primes.
And that property
is written here.
So s is the primes that
are less than N to 1/2.
And on this big
region, R Ps of n
is the same as just
characteristic function
of primes.
It tells us who's prime.
But this function is nicer than
this function on the face of it
because as a second
good property,
which is that it is a
multiplicative convolution
of a whole bunch
of things together.
And so we, in particular,
can split it up like this.
And we see it has this
multiplicative convolution
structure.
I guess another thing that
I used without saying it
as clearly as I should have is
that we use that, pointwise, f
and g are bounded by around 1.
And that comes about for
the following reason.
Pointwise, all of
these functions
are bounded by 1
from the definitions.
And then, if you look
at f at a point N,
well, there are different
ways of factoring N.
And so they contribute
different amounts.
And there aren't very many
ways to factor a number,
and so f of N is pretty small.
And I think that's it.
I think that's all that we used
about R Ps and about primes.
Proving things about
primes is a funny business
because we don't know
that much about primes.
And so you have a theorem,
something about the primes,
you could ask, well, what
input about the primes
did we put into this theorem?
And there's not that
many different things
that we know how to
use as input anyway.
And so for today
it was this thing.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: In the
Cauchy-Schwarz, what
about, do we always
lose something, or are
there other situations
like [INAUDIBLE]?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Good.
It's a great question.
And there is a specific
question, but the big picture
question was, at what
steps in this argument
did we lose something?
So we proved a theorem here.
It's a nice theorem, but
it's not the whole truth.
We put at the beginning the
conjectures of what we believe
are true, which are way stronger
than this in several respects.
Therefore, we must have lost
some things in this theorem.
Where did we lose them?
Let's think through the proof.
OK, so this is an equality.
The primes really
are this thing.
And this thing really
is a convolution,
so we haven't lost anything yet.
We can now break the convolution
up into pieces, like this.
I don't think we
lost too much here.
There is this very annoying
business about the I1,
I2 going over the edge, and
having to make I1 and I2 small.
So there is some loss associated
to that annoying business.
So that's one piece of loss.
Then let's just focus
on one of these pieces.
That piece got fed into
theorem A, so let's
switch the two boards.
So now we fed our piece
into this theorem.
This theorem is
not usually sharp.
So f and g are two
particular functions.
And for those two functions,
probably something much stronger
is true.
Let's think about where
we lost something.
So we wrote down
the left-hand side.
So far, so good.
Then, we applied the
proposition at, basically,
we said this is a convolution.
And you can bound the L-infinity
norm of the convolution
by the product of the L2
norms by Cauchy-Schwarz.
This step here is a big loser.
I didn't bring my red chalk, but
I would put a big red star here.
This is a big lossy step.
So remember that this guy is a
high part, so it has average 0,
and this guy has average 0.
When we convolve
them together there
are a lot of positive and
negative signs that appear.
Usually there will be
cancellation there,
but we didn't take advantage
of any of that cancellation.
We just used the
triangle inequality
and so we got this upper bound.
That's probably very lossy.
So for our particular
functions f and g,
that step was
probably very lossy.
Now this more general theorem
holds for any functions f and g,
which is nice.
If you could choose any f and
g, then for one particular q
that may well have been correct.
You could rig f and g so
that for one particular q
this Cauchy-Schwarz was sharp.
But I don't know
how to rig f and g
so that for most of these P's or
q's something like that happens.
It sounds even unlikely
to me that that is true.
So it's plausible
that without any more
input about prime
numbers, it's plausible
that there's a much stronger
version of this theorem.
But I have no idea
how to prove it.
OK, so that was
our big lossy step.
Then, we went on
to the next step.
We did this Cauchy-Schwarz.
I don't think this
one is so bad.
For this Cauchy-Schwarz
to be sharp,
we just means that
it would be sharp
if, for the different P's,
all these L2 norms were
about the same as each other.
I think that usually happens.
And then, we applied
the large sieve.
And the large sieve
itself is usually not
lossy in the key ranges.
So this is the really
important loss here
and would require a big,
new idea to do better.
Cool.
Nice questions, everybody.
Let's break there, but I'll
also hang out for office hours
if there are more things that
people want to talk about.